MERIDIAN HEALTH GROUP — HIPAA PRIVACY & SECURITY POLICY
Version 3.0 | Effective Date: January 1, 2026
Approved by: Dr. Susan Whitfield, Chief Compliance Officer

1. PURPOSE
This policy establishes the standards and procedures for protecting
Protected Health Information (PHI) in compliance with the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA),
the HITECH Act, and all applicable state privacy regulations.

2. SCOPE
This policy applies to all Meridian Health Group workforce members,
including employees, contractors, volunteers, trainees, and any
person whose conduct is under the direct control of Meridian Health.

3. DEFINITIONS
PHI: Individually identifiable health information transmitted or
maintained in any form (electronic, paper, or oral).
ePHI: PHI that is created, stored, transmitted, or received electronically.
Covered Entity: Meridian Health Group and all affiliated clinics.
Business Associate: Any entity that creates, receives, maintains,
or transmits PHI on behalf of Meridian Health Group.

4. MINIMUM NECESSARY STANDARD
Workforce members shall access only the minimum PHI necessary
to perform their assigned job functions. Access requests beyond
standard role-based permissions require supervisor approval and
must be documented in the access control log.

5. PATIENT RIGHTS
Patients have the right to: (a) access their medical records,
(b) request amendments to their records, (c) receive an accounting
of disclosures, (d) request restrictions on certain uses, and
(e) request confidential communications.

6. ELECTRONIC SAFEGUARDS
All workstations accessing ePHI must use encrypted connections.
Multi-factor authentication is required for remote access.
Automatic session timeout is set to 15 minutes of inactivity.
USB storage devices are prohibited on systems containing ePHI.

7. BREACH NOTIFICATION
Any suspected breach must be reported to the Privacy Officer within
24 hours of discovery. The Privacy Officer will conduct a risk
assessment and, if necessary, notify affected individuals within
60 days as required by federal regulation.

8. BUSINESS ASSOCIATE AGREEMENTS
All vendors with access to PHI must execute a Business Associate
Agreement (BAA) prior to receiving any PHI. BAAs must be reviewed
annually and renewed before expiration. The vendor BAA registry
is maintained by the Compliance Department.

9. TRAINING REQUIREMENTS
All workforce members must complete HIPAA training within 30 days
of hire and annually thereafter. Training records are maintained
by Human Resources for a minimum of six years.

10. SANCTIONS
Violations of this policy may result in disciplinary action up to
and including termination, and may also result in civil or criminal
penalties under federal and state law.

For questions, contact: compliance@meridianhealth.example.com
